So, thank you, everyone, for joining us
to this session, Teaching Data Science.
And please welcome James Wade.
Well, good afternoon, everybody.
I'm really excited to be here today
to talk about generative AI and Posit Academy,
and potentially the impacts of generative AI
on coding education overall.
An alternative title I could have given this talk
is How I Learned I Was Wrong About Generative AI.
To say what I mean by that, I first want to tell you
about my experience with Academy at Dow, where I work.
We've had around 200 researchers that have taken,
have participated in the program.
And to give you an idea of who these people are,
they're typically chemists, chemical engineers,
maybe a physicist,
somebody with a strong technical background
who often has a PhD in this technical subject.
The learners themselves are more or less
evenly split between R and Python.
What's more, they don't really identify as a data scientist.
They are part of a growing community
we have internally of citizen data scientists,
which you might have your own definition in your head,
but for us, what it means is somebody who's interested
in applying concepts of data science to their work,
but doesn't identify as a data scientist
as the core function of their role.
Now, when I started playing with large language models
and generative AI capabilities,
I got really excited about them.
I have a number of examples of some capabilities
that I imagine you might be familiar with
that can really turbocharge your own experience
for how you can write code.
And I thought that the same was going to apply
to the Academy participants.
We'd train them up.
They would go off and create amazing things.
But when I asked them, they told me
they didn't really like these coding assistants.
Out of five stars, they gave them,
over half of the learners gave them two out of five.
Now, I don't know about you,
but if you're looking on Yelp or Google Maps
for restaurants around here to go to for dinner tonight,
you're probably not going to go to the two-star ones.
Neither will I.
So what gives?
Why aren't these learners finding
the AI coding assistants to be helpful?
To answer that question,
I want to ask another question.
And I'll also introduce you
to somebody named Andy Matuszak.
He's an independent researcher
who explores tools for thought
and is a skeptic but extremely interested
in how AI can augment education.
He has a fantastic lecture
that I encourage you all to go watch
called How Might We Learn,
where he asks a very important question for learning.
What were the most rewarding,
high-growth periods of your life?
I'd like for all of you to take a second
and think about what might this be for each of you.
When he asked people this question,
two themes emerged.
Number one, learning wasn't the point.
Rather, there was some other objective
that they had to go learn something to go do.
Secondly, learning, it really worked.
How many of you have seen a new package come out
or a new capability you want to go learn?
You started to dive in and you hit a wall.
Of course, these high-growth, rewarding experiences
should have the opposite impact of that.
So let's go back to these coding assistants.
What's missing?
Why aren't they providing this rewarding,
high-growth experience?
The answer for me is threshold concepts.
Now, if you're like me, maybe six months ago,
you have no idea what threshold concepts are.
So let's define them.
There's a number of characteristics,
and I'm certainly no expert in this,
but some of the key points are, number one,
these are ideas that once you understand them,
they transform your perception and approach
to a discipline or a topic.
Number two, these threshold concepts must be encountered.
You can't be told them.
When you think about these threshold concepts,
think about struggle and embracing the struggle.
They have some other important characteristics
that can guide us and maybe give us a hint
at why coding assistants don't allow us to master them.
Number one, they're troublesome.
They might be conceptually difficult,
and they might challenge our existing ways
of thinking about a subject.
Number two, they're liminal.
We might not learn in a linear fashion.
We have to take some steps back
as we're trying to take some of these steps forward.
We get confused along the way.
They're transformatives,
where we're able to recognize new patterns,
have new revelations, really have new understanding.
And lastly, they're irreversible.
Once you learn these concepts, you can't unlearn them.
Now, I want to take you back
to my own rewarding high-growth period in my life.
Also, the reason why I wasn't at PositConf last year.
It's these two.
On the left is the troublemaker, Henry,
and on the right is the sweet child, Penelope.
They taught me a lot.
Number one, they taught me
that asking for help means that you care,
that self-care is not selfish,
and that incomplete to-do lists are okay.
Now, a couple of years ago,
if I were sitting in this audience and I heard these,
I'd be like, okay, these are trite cliches, whatever.
But to some extent, that's the point.
I didn't experience this.
I didn't go through the struggle,
and so these concepts wouldn't have meant much to me
until I experienced them.
So let's bring this back to data science and to Academy.
Part of Academy is to impart you with the skills
to use all of the packages of the hex stickers
I'm sure you recognize on the right here.
We can learn these threshold concepts
like tidy data enables efficient analysis
or modular code enhances reusability and clarity,
or maybe visualization is a tool
for exploration and communication.
Now, if you've been coding in R for a while,
you probably can resonate with these,
but it might be hard for you to explain to a beginner
to a beginner why these concepts are so transformational.
Beyond threshold concepts, chat GBT
or maybe pick your favorite AI coding assistant,
there's a couple of things it won't give you,
and it's beyond these threshold concepts.
It's these learning dispositions.
One of these is a sense of the possible or agency,
and this really comes through the mentorship
that's part of Academy.
You leave this understanding that you can tackle a problem.
You have new capabilities and a persistence
that you didn't have before.
Another learning disposition is flexibility.
You can expand the palette of possibilities
of the types of problems you're willing to encounter
or willing to take on.
You're not so constrained as you might not have been before.
Okay, so let's zoom out a bit.
You've heard me talk about all these things
that these AI coding assistants won't do for you.
They don't give you these threshold concepts.
They don't give you these learning dispositions.
Should we throw them away?
I would certainly answer no,
but it's important to think of how we're going to use these.
Let's go through some analogies.
Many of you may have heard a phrase popularized
by Steve Jobs in the 19,
I think it was in 1990,
of computers as the bicycle for the mind.
The analogy here is that we're walking along
and computers allow us to move much faster,
but there's an important implication here.
It's that, yes, with these bicycles, we can go faster,
but we still have to steer.
What's more, we have to know where we're going
and we might have to fall a few times.
Maybe we need to continue maybe butchering the analogy here.
Maybe we need to wear a helmet,
but we can all agree that the bicycle
is not an invention that's going away
and it's probably something that we should pay attention to.
For a different analogy,
does anybody in the audience play the cello?
I don't know if we have a bias here,
but that's way higher than I thought it would be.
Actually, well, I do not,
but let's say you're going to go compose
a masterpiece concerto.
You could ask some of these new AI capabilities
to go write that concerto for you
and it would produce one
that probably sounds pretty good,
maybe is passable,
maybe even for a naive listener like myself,
I would actually enjoy,
but it's not the concerto that you would write.
Much in the same way,
these coding capabilities
aren't going to produce what we are going to create.
If I'm going to go make a new shiny app,
part of the creation process
is using the app itself,
the creation of the app itself
to discover what it is I actually want to create.
So in that sense,
writing concertos and coding are contingent disciplines.
Let's go back to Academy.
I have here a very overly simplified curriculum
of the foundations course,
and I would challenge you to find anything from this
that you would take out.
The curriculum itself is 10 weeks long
and it actually really challenges the learners
to push them up to their limits
and learning capabilities.
I'm not willing to take things out
like summarizing data
or certainly writing functions.
So what do we do?
We have 10 weeks
and we've really settled upon that
as an appropriate length of time for this.
How do we introduce these AI coding assistants?
My suggestion here is to introduce them
gradually and intentionally.
For example, let's say week three,
you've just got exposed to the pipe,
you can start to summarize your own data.
Maybe it's now it's time for you
to use these AI coding assistants
to do things like explain this piece of code,
explain this piece of code that I don't understand,
or maybe explain this piece of code from a peer
who did something really cool.
You could also start to ask it to expand
beyond your current abilities,
maybe by just a little bit,
doing things like show me how to group
two columns together.
Let's fast forward a few weeks later
where you're starting to feel
a little bit more at ease
within a Markdown notebook,
maybe plotting is becoming something comfortable,
something you're excited to show off
to your colleagues,
and you've started to get annoyed
with some spaghetti code.
Now it's time for you to write
some of this into functions.
That can be both tricky
and you probably also want to go
and document some of this as well.
Well, as many of you probably know,
these coding assistants are fantastic
when it comes to writing documentation.
It also can maybe help you improve
some inefficiencies in your code.
I've also found it's quite helpful
if you ask it to impersonate
some of your favorite programmers out there.
In fact, if I ask the coding assistant
to write in the style of Hadley,
it usually does a pretty good job.
As an aside, if you ask it to write
in the style of Max Kuhn,
it ends up going back to about a decade ago
and majorly favoring Carrot,
but that will come with time.
So let's fast forward to the end.
You're almost done with your curriculum.
It's time for you to go
and showcase some of the great creations
that have come about.
Now's the time to really,
you know, get on that bike, so to speak.
It's time for you to maybe go a bit faster.
Now it's time to maybe bring
some of these code assistants
inside of your IDE.
Maybe it's time for you to go pay
for a GitHub Copilot license,
or you can go beyond the curriculum
that you've already been exposed to.
Because these models have been trained
on tremendous amounts of code.
Looking at general ways
people solve problems is a good question
you can ask of them.
Asking questions like,
what packages should I explore next?
So how can we change this experience
for these learners?
I think that's part of the answer,
but I want to go back to close here
to threshold concepts again.
Now I'll admit that threshold concepts
are supposed to be established ideas
within a field.
That's certainly not true
with generative AI capabilities overall.
We're far from having clear established ideas
in this space,
but that doesn't mean we can't try.
I'd love to hear from all of you
of what you think the threshold concepts
happen to be for these coding assistants.
Some that come to mind for me
are drive faster,
but don't forget to steer.
Coming back to that bicycle analogy again.
Or maybe something like prompting matters.
Learning to use these capabilities is a skill.
But I'm sure there's much more.
What comes to mind for you?
Are these right?
Do these resonate?
Establishing these threshold concepts
I think will be critical
in successful adoption of these tools,
which will keep us relevant as coders,
but also make sure we're preparing
these new learners for the future.
I want to finish with a huge thank you
to all of the people
who made our Academy program possible.
I have Tony Sokolov in the audience here
who's done a tremendous amount of work
to make sure we identify the right people
who can participate from this program.
And this has been a tremendous collaboration
with Posit that gets me excited
to come to work.
And of course, to come here
to the conference as well.
So I want to thank you all for your time
and I'm happy to answer any questions
if you have them.
Thank you so much, James.
I have a question, actually.
We've been listening to several talks
that speak about how generative AI
can augment your learning experience
or augment your coding experience,
just like you talked about.
At what point,
when you're a little bit more advanced
at these concepts,
at what point do you think
it's reasonable or okay
to use generative AI tools
to learn new concepts?
Yeah, I think you can start with that
quite early on, actually,
especially if you can learn from examples.
So if you have,
if it's something that nobody's been,
nobody has done before,
you haven't seen somebody do before,
that can certainly be a challenge
because you're going to be
pushing the constraints
of what the model has seen before.
But if it's something,
if it's a new concept for you,
but not a new concept for the community,
it's likely that you'll be starting
from a pretty good place.
But of course, the intuition
that I'd like to give out there,
I thought about including in this talk,
but it's clippy, right?
So you have this useful assistance
on your desktop.
Keep in mind that it has lots of context
that it can provide for you.
Of course it can be wrong,
but lots of my colleagues
other than Tony are wrong as well.
And I still work with them
and I still can learn from them as well.
That's great, thank you.
So we actually have some viewers
in the virtual audience
that don't know what Posit Academy is.
Could you give like a very short rundown?
Absolutely.
So Posit Academy is an offering
unsurprisingly from Posit
that's a 10 week,
somewhat intensive apprenticeship program
that takes you from learning
little to no code
in either R or Python
and gives you a curated curriculum
that allows you to adopt the skills
that are going to be most relevant
to you in your role.
So it'll include things
like we talked about,
summarizing data, creating visualizations.
There's a lot of customization
that can be applied to that.
Probably one of the more important parts
about the whole program,
in addition, aside from the wonderful mentors
that you get to work with from Posit
is that it's project based.
So you get to apply what you're learning
on as close to a real data set
that's relevant to your work.
Amazing, thank you.
So we have another question
that was kind of similar
to what I asked before.
You gave examples
of what packages should I explore next
or suggest ways to improve my code?
What do you see as the dangers
of learners relying on an AI assistant
for next steps?
Yeah, so there's certainly,
I mean, you can end up going
in directions that
maybe the field has moved beyond.
So I gave the example
of Max Kuhn with Carrot, right?
He would certainly recommend
that you use tidy models these days.
So that's the sort of thing,
maybe the documentation
isn't fully up to date.
It's possible that the code
is going to be wrong.
But it seems similar
to maybe looking at
a Stack Overflow post
where nobody has had a chance
to upvote or something like that.
So the risks are different.
The risks are now isolated
to your own experience
with these agents.
But it's not that,
the experience is,
the same rules apply, right?
Where you want to be skeptical
of code that you're going to go execute.
But these agents are getting better
and better.
And there's an incentive
especially for the commercial ones,
for them to align with things
that aren't going to get you in trouble.
Right, right.
And even from my own experience,
I remember when
some of the AI coding assistants
weren't even able
to access the internet
and things have just improved incredibly.
So, yep, good news.
Hopefully that continues
on that trajectory.
I think we have time
for one more question here.
So,
sorry, just reading this here.
So, would Posit Academy
benefit someone
who already has
a lot of coding experience
but lacks confidence with coding?
So that would just perfectly describe
some of our initial cohorts.
It was people who were
very enthusiastic
and didn't identify as coders
or data scientists for sure.
They ended up being
star students in the curriculum.
And also,
there's pluses and minuses
to having people
who have this advanced practice.
You can inspire
some of your cohort
who maybe doesn't have
the same level of experience as you do.
But sometimes that can be intimidating.
So you need to be mindful
about the discrepancy
within an individual cohort
to match.
It doesn't have to be perfectly matched.
But yeah, it certainly can give
people a level of
certification
that maybe you don't get.
But if you're wondering yourself,
if you need that certification,
Academy is great.
But that's not,
just getting a certificate
is not the reason to do it.
I'm sure any of you
who are feeling
self-conscious about that,
you're doing great.
We all feel that way.
Thank you so much.
And we really appreciate
your talk today.
Thank you.